Man, we're going in a real dark place.
I've never talked about this stuff out
loud.
The American entrepreneur broadcaster
Tom Bill.
I'm about to ruin that [__] good
mood.
I tried to believe I was special and
either luck of the draw or the fact that
I really am average, I would always run
into somebody better than me. I was
sliding rapidly towards depression.
The breakthrough for me was to accept
that I was hopelessly average and that
that was still going to allow me to be
successful. I can sum up personal
responsibility in a single quote by Kobe
Bryant. Booze don't block dunks. The
most insidious thing about excuses, you
have a valid reason to feel like a
victim, but the question is, is that
going to serve you moving forward? When
I reflect on how many people in our
society are feeling anxious these days,
is there something we are just
fundamentally doing wrong about the way
that we're living our lives?
Yes.
And what is that?
I would lose respect for myself if I
didn't say this. So, here it goes.
So, without further ado, I'm Steven
Bartlett and this is the Diary of a CEO
USA edition. I hope nobody's listening,
but if you are, then please keep this to
yourself.
[Music]
The story you tell yourself about
yourself is the single most important
thing you're going to craft.
Facts.
I was watching a compilation of things
you'd said upstairs before I came
downstairs. And that really stuck out to
me because when I think about the the
Tom Billy story that I know, it's the
question that I find so repeatedly
uh fascinating is how a man went from
what you told me in our last
conversation many years ago. You were
someone that was kind of counted out by
seemingly by your mother, by yourself,
and other people around you, your
current wife's father to this guy that I
see as the antithesis of that. How did
you what did or how did you change that
self story? Well, the how I changed that
story is so rudimentary that I wish
people would take me seriously. So the
only belief that matters is that if I
put energy and effort into getting
better, I actually will get better. And
so you can look at anything and say,
"Okay, maybe I suck at this right now,"
which was the key realization for my
life. Okay, I'm I actually am not good.
Like my father-in-law wasn't crazy. I
really wasn't anywhere useful for his
daughter at that time. My mom wasn't
crazy. I really was lazy. Like, so she
was just picking up on the fact that I
was tremendously lazy. She wanted me to
be successful, but she was just looking
at my behavior. And so, I hadn't been
misidentified. People just didn't
calculate how much I could change and
that I would so grasp on to the ability
to change as an emotional life raft. And
so, the the big switch was that I
decided to believe that I could get
better. And once I made that decision,
it aligned my behaviors with skill
acquisition. And that's all life is,
acquire skills. When I reflect on this
idea of like choosing your beliefs, I
think one of the things that people will
comes to front of mind is it's very hard
to believe something if you don't have
some kind of subjective evidence for
that thing. And when I think about my
own confidence or my own personal
growth, a lot of it came from some type
of subjective evidence. So, I didn't
believe that I could speak in front of
people because I'd never done it before.
And when I hear a lot of the narrative
in the self-development community that
you there's some some narrative in the
self-development community that you need
to look in the mirror in the morning and
say, "I am great. I am a millionaire. I
am successful.
I've never once done that.
Yeah. And this is the this is the the
fine line I'm trying to understand is
why is that [__] Because that's
someone apparently choosing or, you
know, affirming that they are something.
I I don't think it actually is [__]
It just isn't going to get you very far.
So, if what you're hung up on is you
just can't ever fathom that being true,
then saying it may begin to form this
like just like it erodess this lack of
belief that it's possible. Now, my
problem is when people think that just
saying it out loud is going to make it
come true. That for sure isn't true. So,
your behavior is ultimately all that
matters. So if you make all the right
decisions but you have like you
absolutely think that it's impossible
for you but you still do the right
things, you will win. The problem is
that if you believe that it's never
going to happen for you, you won't take
the steps. And so when you look at how
hard something is and you get partway
down that road and you're like, "Wow,
this is really hard. It's making me
confront my insecurities. This does not
feel good and I don't believe it's
possible anyway." Then why would you
keep going? And the answer is you
wouldn't. And so nobody does. And so
everybody who believes it's impossible
and encounters the difficulties that
success will demand of everybody, they
stop 100% of the time. And so by looking
at yourself in the mirror and saying, "I
am a millionaire. I'm a genius." Like
all this stuff, it may function as some
eroding mechanism to those
entrenched beliefs that it's never going
to happen for you. That would not work
for me because there's a part of my
brain that just screams, "This is
bullshit." Like, you know, this is
[__] So for me, I had to align with
what do I believe to be true about
humans? I needed to be I needed to
accept that I was average. That was a
huge moment for me because I tried to
believe I was special and either luck of
the draw or the fact that I really am
average. I've always been around a
substantial number of people that are
smarter than me or faster than me or
stronger than like literally everything,
every niche I tried to find, I would
always run into somebody better than me.
And it was devastating, like really
devastating. And
the breakthrough for me was to accept
that I was hopelessly average and that
that was still going to allow me to be
successful. And so for me, the
breakthrough was reading about the
brain, like just brain science and
understanding brain plasticity. And so
once I understood, whoa, like your brain
actually can change. So that means that
just because I'm not good at something
today doesn't mean I can't good at it
get good at it tomorrow. And so it was
like, well, wait a second. If the
average human is actually designed to
get better, like that is our fundamental
design, not that I'm special, not that
I'm smarter than anybody, but once I
realized, oh my god, that is what the
the DNA of the human animal is designed
to do is learn and grow from context.
And so then it was just like, okay,
word. Like if you're going to just focus
on being the learner, then get your
sense of pride out of being willing to
admit what you're not good at and to sit
at somebody else's feet and learn. And
all of my success is a result of that.
Tremendous self-awareness. Even the use
of the word realization, that
realization that you were pursuing um
something as opposed to something else
and you were able to kind of separate
yourself from your ego or at least look
look down on it and understand the the
the the role it was having on your
decision-m self-awareness and then huge
humility. Are these skills?
Yes, because I didn't have them in the
beginning.
Interesting.
Now, self-awareness is a double-edged
sword. I didn't have any when I was a
kid and I didn't have anxiety. As I have
really leaned into developing
self-awareness, it's actually made me
more anxious
really
because I'm hyper aware of what I'm not
good at, what I am good at, how I'm
being perceived, how I perceive myself
that things matter. Like this this is
man when I really try to shake this off
the thing that I keep coming back to is
life has consequences and building and
selling a billion dollar company has
consequences like they're amazing.
So getting good at something and winning
can change your life and those things
are powerful. And so it's like I
realized the game I'm playing. I
realized the stakes. And so, one of the
things that I really have to focus on
now is like
I don't value that stuff. I need to be
careful not to value that stuff. That
what matters, the thing that you started
this off, the only thing that matters is
how you feel about yourself when you're
by yourself. And all the success in the
world can't touch that. But you're
constructing that in your own mind.
You're constructing a value system. You
are constructing beliefs. Now, most of
the time, you don't realize that you're
constructing them. So they're invisible.
You just see cool [__] and you think,
"Wow, that's cool." You don't realize
that in saying, "Wow, that's cool." You
just made a value judgment. You
reinforce that in your own mind. And now
in some subtle way, you're moving
towards that and judging yourself
against whether you have that or not. So
you have to keep coming back to what's
cool is feeling good about myself.
What's cool is having a dope marriage.
What's cool is getting better. What's
cool is sitting at somebody's feet and
learning something new. So I have to
reinforce that value system because from
an evolutionary standpoint we have all
these weird things baked in already. So
50% of you is just baked in and then 50%
of you is created really subtly from the
time you are a child and you have no
idea that you're absorbing and creating
these belief systems that are governing
your value system that are governing
what you think is worthy of respect.
Which means if you think that the only
thing worthy of respect is tremendous
success, then you'll put yourself on
that wheel trying to earn your own
respect. And then if you don't get it,
you'll be in the dumps. And then if you
do get it, you're going to realize it
didn't matter in the first place because
you have these embedded things in your
brain. And here's the most insidious.
You will get this more than most. There
is no amount of success big enough that
you can stand in it forever.
There's no meal big enough, no feast
overwhelming enough that you never need
to eat again, no drink so thirst
quenching that you don't need to drink
again. We get that with like the bodily
stuff. No sex so great that you don't
want sex again. So why is it that we
think that success would be any
different? And people think it is. They
think I I will have reached that, right?
Like if you read my resume, it sounds
like I should just permanently be happy,
right? You sold a billion dollar
company. You live in a really fancy
house. You've got a lot of money. It
doesn't work like that. None of that
stuff carries any weight with me today.
I have to earn my self-respect every
day. And so I have to be really careful
what I choose to value because that will
determine how I feel about myself when
I'm by myself, which is ultimately all
that matters.
You mentioned the anxiety that comes
with that self-awareness. Now what what
is cuz what I heard there was this kind
of expectation that you're placing on
yourself which is part of the bakedin
part of Tom is that the thing causing
the anxiety now anxiety is really
complex. So let's start with diet. The
biggest change that I made to my anxiety
was stopping drinking uh sugar-free
Monster which I love by the way
absolutely love them. Uh, but there's
something, right? There's something in
them that causes my microbiome to get
out of whack and I will feel really
anxious. So, I used to have generalized
anxiety disorder. I couldn't even tell
you why I felt anxious. I just did all
the time. And finally, I realized there
was a component of diet. So, I no longer
get generalized anxiety. Now, I will
still get anxious if I'm dealing with
something that's really like the stakes
are really high and it really matters to
me. So, I have to I've had to learn
meditation. that changed my life in ways
that I can't even convey. So, that's
been really important. But it is it and
some of it is going to be just the way
that I'm wired. I have I don't have an
addictive personality, but I have an
obsessive mind. Now, my obsessive mind
has led to my success because I will
think about problems all the time. And
so, like, I'm actually a really slow
thinker, but people give me all this
credit because I can talk fast, but I
talk fast because I've thought about it
obsessively for days, weeks, months,
years, depending on what thing we're
talking about. But that rumination I in
fact, I was just talking to uh um a guy
that does uh he doesn't like the term
hypnotherapy, but everybody will
understand that idea. So, he's really
wellversed in hypnosis. And he said
people break into three personality
types. And the personality type that
struggles the most is the personality
type that both experiences the world
incredibly emotionally but then has an
analytical mind that ruminates on the
emotions. And that's where I'm at. So I
experience the emotional gamut of life.
And it's incredible. I would never want
to not. It's wonderful.
Life is is a roller coaster of um
incredible
highs and lows. and meditation and my
belief system allow me to even that out
so that I never get too out of whack in
any direction.
But I'll loop on ideas and if it's a
negative idea about myself, I'll loop
and loop and loop and loop and loop. And
so that's why I said at the beginning,
what you allow yourself to repeat is
really going to determine the quality of
your life. And so I have to really get
good at interrupting that. So that's why
meditation is the key for me to dealing
with anxiety. like as I can feel it
ratcheting up, it's really my mind
ruminating on all the ways that it could
go wrong. And so I have to find a way to
insert myself to break that rehearsal of
failure and instead force myself to
focus on rehearsing success, which it's
almost silly, but it really does drop my
anxiety to next to nothing. But I have
to really forcefully insert myself.
Does it always work that process? There
are things that are so high in amplitude
that it's like, okay, this is really
like stressing me out. Um,
but yeah, it always works. I've never
been more than 45 minutes away from
complete equinimity
really.
And that's that's going through things
that are where there's hundreds of
millions of dollars on the line. It's
like really really stressful.
I've experienced anxiety too. And I
before I had experienced it, I I think I
experienced it in my mid20ies for the
first time when my business got really
really difficult and when the stakes got
really really high. I always thought it
was something that others other other
people experienced. I never thought it
would be something that would find me
and um so my perspective and my this is
why I'm so compelled by the concept
because it did find me and I couldn't
believe it did. I couldn't believe it
when it did because as I said I thought
it was something that some kind of you
know maybe chemical disorder. When I
reflect on how many people in our
society are feeling anxious these days,
it be pulls into question, is there
something we are just fundamentally
doing wrong about the way that we're
living our lives?
Yes.
And what is that?
Diet is the biggest problem. You think
it's
100%. If you were if you said you can
have what you can make one change to
somebody's life, what change would you
make to lower their anxiety? 100% their
diet. Now, once that's regulated, it
doesn't mean that it goes away. I still
have anxiety. But when I think I've
reduced it by 70% through diet alone.
Now the remaining 30% is still a pain.
So you really do want to address it. And
for that I've had to turn to meditation.
I've had to insert myself into my
ruminating thoughts and be very
thoughtful about that. I've had to
adjust my belief system so that I'm not
afraid of failure. Like there are a lot
of things that I've had to do to get
myself to that place. Um but if I could
only make one change, it would be that.
Now,
living in the social media era is
amazing. It's amazing, man. And it's
given so much. And I think it's given
far more than it takes. But you really
have to be careful like to give people
an idea.
I have had a lot of success. I have a
lot of the worldly things that people
want. And even I can look at somebody's
house. If people saw my house and then
they hear the following statement, they
will laugh. But I can look at someone's
house and be like, "Yo, that's a house."
Right? So, uh, it never ends, right? So,
it's like if I pee out and I had the
best house in the world, I'd be like,
"Yeah, but Elon Musk just built a rocket
that can carry 300 people to Mars."
Like, what have I done? So, there's
always some other thing. So, you just
you've got to be psychotically careful
about what you allow yourself to value
yourself for because I value
achievement. I think it's extraordinary.
I'm very glad that I have that. It makes
me strive. It's pushed me to be a better
version of myself. But at the same time
I have to be really careful not to let
it damage my sense of self which it will
do very rapidly. And I think every we we
have to agree that there is a north star
and for optimizing a human life. And I
will say that which reduces suffering
and elevates the individual to
fulfillment. Those would be my two
things. reduce human suffering in
yourself and others and elevate your
sense of fulfillment in yourself and
help other people do the same. Like that
seems to be the cocktail for the most
resilient
mental state you could hope for so that
even as life goes up and down and you
win and lose and people are born and
people die. I mean, we're all going to
go through just unrelenting misery from
time to time. It just is. Um, and the
only way to even all of that out is to
pursue those two things. Now, once we
have that, then you start optimizing for
lifestyle and beliefs and your thought
patterns and all of that stuff.
I really do feel like if you removed
social media, you'd remove a tremendous
amount of anxiety and obviously
everyone's context would get smaller.
So, the comparison part, I mean, there's
various reasons, front of mind reasons
why I think social media causes people
to be anxious. One of them is obviously
all the feedback we get about our
success, our achievements, our projects,
whatever. And the other is um the
feedback we go searching for via
comparison.
So me looking out at the world, which is
now billions of people on my phone,
whereas once upon a time, my human
design probably um I was probably
designed to deal with about 20 or maybe,
you know, a small tribe.
You could also optimize here. Here is
the brutal thing. put out a tweet, like
put out a hot take, but something you
really believe in, like that really
matters to you and and you're moved by
it and you feel like you're adding
something positive to the world, like
put out one of those tweets. It will not
be universally loved.
I've done that last week and it was torn
to pieces.
Yep.
And it was like in newspapers.
That is that is emotionally brutal.
Yeah.
And when you realize that, man, I just
want to like connect. I want I want to
put something rad out into the world,
but then people kick you in the face.
And it makes you want to turtle up. And
so it's this weird exercise of like you
have to divorce yourself from what other
people think, which is powerful if you
can do it, but we're the human animal.
And so you can't ever, I think,
completely detach. We are, as I like to
say, we are both the shout and the echo.
So we are what we say, do, and believe,
but we're also what people tell us about
the things that we say, do, and believe.
And it matters because we're a tribe
animal.
So yeah, it gets real weird. And then
you and I are both into web 3 in a big
way. The only thing I know that's going
to be more devastating to mental health
than web two and social media is web 3.
But it's also incredible and it's so
life-changing that we have to find a way
to mitigate some of the bad. But you're
taking all of the things of web two and
putting money on top of it. And so now
people are really freaking out.
Why is it going to be worse web three?
Because it's money. You're playing with
people's money. And so now it's not fun
in games anymore. It's like people are
they're oftentimes investing more than
they should in something. And so it will
be bad for them because now something
that they otherwise could have enjoyed
becomes incredibly stressful. And for
the creators, we're going to destroy a
lot of creators who are just like,
"Yeah, I'm not I I can't. This isn't fun
anymore." Like, it was fun, but I've now
taken money for this thing. I have
obligations. You have to be honest about
that. But if like, it's not going well.
Most people are not going to have the
the tools that they need to grapple with
that, to work through problems, to
improve, to get better. Like, it's just
going to be really hard. And so when you
take the the ability for people all over
the world to tell you what they think
and then you let them invest money, now
it gets it gets crazy real fast and
we're already seeing projects implode
because the creator was maybe an artist
who's already wearing their heart on
their sleeve and it just doesn't work
and they're not able to deal with that
and then the project poof.
it goes away. And I don't think that
most people had ill intent. Of course,
there are people that have ill intent,
but I don't think most of them do, but
they're just it's a business and they
don't know how to run a business. A lot
of we've talked about a lot of stress,
pressure, tension, and all the [__]
that comes with striving. You said
achievement and striving is very
important. What is the cocktail the the
ingredients that you now need for that
fulfillment that you described earlier?
All right. I actually have a as close as
you're going to get to a conceptual math
equation here. Okay. So fulfillment is
very simple for me. So and it has to do
with the directives that are embedded in
your brain from an evolutionary
standpoint. So you must work hard. It's
embedded in your brain to acquire skills
that matter to you that allow you to
elevate yourself and others in service
of a goal that's both exciting and
honorable. So exciting and honorable
means that you're just amped about it.
You dig it. So I dig storytelling. just
I do and I want to help people through
storytelling. I do. My life
circumstances have led me to that. The
way that I'm hardwired, I just have an
over um an outsized response to stories.
And so I'm drawn to that and because of
life experience, I want to use stories
to help people. So that's very exciting
for me. Now, it's also honorable because
I'm not just looking to make myself rich
or be admired for telling a cool story.
I actually want to help people with that
story and I hold myself accountable to
that. So when you have that cocktail,
you're working hard to garner a set of
skills that allow you to serve not only
yourself but other people. It that's
fulfillment. So people can say whatever
they want. And I know like if I'm
actually out there every day doing my
best to help people, I'm going to feel
good about that. Now, I'm not going to
feel good about people misunderstanding
that. That's still going to suck. But I
know what's in my heart. And so if I'm
like, "No, for real. I'm showing up no
matter what people say. I really am
showing up to help people." then that
will give you the emotional resilience
that you need to see yourself through.
So fulfillment is
it's able to withstand even moments of
unhappiness. And when you have
fulfillment, the thing that you believe
in that you're fighting for, then it
gets easier to push through, you know,
whatever frustrations, difficulties, the
mob coming after you, whatever. If you
don't have that and it was you were just
trying to be famous or get approval and
it feels like the entire world is piling
on you, you just are like, "Yeah, I'm
done with this." So, there really has to
be something you're fighting for.
You know, when you do interviews and you
make content, and you do that a lot,
right? So, you're very much like me over
this side of the table. When I make
content, sometimes the thing that's
front of mind comes through.
So, if I'm if this week or that's why
before we started recording, I asked you
the question, what's front of mind? The
thing that's front of mind tends to come
through. I can't help it. So if I sit
here with a guest and they are a a chef,
I'll end up talking about the thing that
happened like two days ago and I can
kind of I kind of get that a little bit
from you that you that one of the things
that's front of mind is like I'm maybe
I'm totally wrong is dealing with the
external criticism from the mob who are
questioning something that to you came
from a place of sincerity and
authenticity. is that
since we started since I started being
on camera that has been front of mind
like you really have to deal with that
and when I first started so I first
stepped in front of the camera like
seven years eight years ago something
like that and I was like I'm not sure I
really want to do this and I wrote an
article that I thought was it really was
like Tom what is the like the the most
life-changing thing you've realized that
you could offer as an idea to other
people and that would change their life.
And I wrote this article about how if
you get hit, and in fact, I'm going to
light myself on fire again because I
know how people respond to this, but
this is really what I wrote. If you get
hit by a drunk driver, it's all your
fault. And that's amazing because you
could do something about it. You could
do something different next time and get
a different result. Now, of course, I no
longer use the word fault because that
just does not lead me anywhere
productive. But that was the article and
people lit me on fire and I was shocked
to my core. I I cannot tell you dude
when I hit publish on that I was like oh
my god people are going to love this.
It's going to change so many lives. This
is going to be incredible. And then you
people were not loving it. And so I was
like whoa. Okay. So that was
extraordinarily eye opening. Um,
but because I really am trying to help
like this was
working at Quest, working in the inner
cities, you realize or at least my big
revelation having big brothered for a
kid in the inner cities when I was much
younger and seeing what it was doing to
him and then having a thousand employees
that grew up in the inner cities and
being like, "Oh my god, like this is
your zip code in most of the developed
world, whatever the equivalent of zip
code is, is the number one predictor of
your future success. And so I was like,
there's got to be a way to help people
with that. And the conclusion I came to
is it's this set of ideas that are
timeless. They have nothing to do with
me, but I have a way of explaining them
through how I had to struggle with them.
And so maybe I'm able to say it in a way
that certain people will hear. And so
between writing, between being on
camera, between um the stories that I
hope to tell that I can embed these
ideas and get them across. And it does.
They're in today's world. I've been
given a gift, which is social media,
which is web 3, which is going to allow
me to expand all of this and reach
people I never could have dreamed of
reaching before. But it comes with the
the other side which is you put
something out that really is coming from
a good place and people still are not
loving it. Like I I my wife and I do
this show um called Relationship Theory
and I did a thing when I say even now
relisting to it I can't believe that at
least half of the people that hear it
are just infuriated.
And it's about like how to you know
develop a good sex relationship with
your partner. I send clips to my
girlfriend.
Oh my god. And and people were just
like, "Who the [__] does this guy think
he is?" I'm like, "Wow." So anyway, you
really do like we we are raising a
generation of people that need to
develop incredible mental resilience
against that if you want to be able to
engage with this incredible gift that is
the web and being able to communicate to
large groups of people. But it really
does require like developing a value
system and a belief system that's going
to
make you resilient to that because it
isn't easy even for me. And I've spent a
lot of time building the resilience and
I'm older. So it's like a lot of the
things that probably would have thrown
me off in my 20s now don't. But it's a
thing for sure.
That article seemed just from the title
seemed to be one that centers on like
personal responsibility. Am I guessing
that correctly? You then use the word
eye opening because I imagine what you
wrote there still to this day you
believe to be true
to the core of my existence.
So the word eye openening is
illuminating for me because it means
that it taught you something not about
what you had written but about the
reaction to what you'd written and about
the people reacting. What is it you've
learned about why personal
responsibility is and I've seen on this
podcast like if I'm going to be
counseledled for anything it's probably
there's a number of things but my
pursuit of like being a champion for
personal responsibility is up there. Mo
Gaat sat here and said when he published
his book he he open sources it to 500
people and he says he loses about I
think it was 10% of people they just
click off the document when they get to
the personal responsibility part they're
just seem to be inherently offended by
it
where is the truth
what can be done
okay so this goes back to what we were
talking about earlier which is I just
know people are going to uh just really
love this section uh but I can't help
myself I would lose respect for myself
if I didn't say this stuff. I could see
myself one day not being on camera
anymore. I can't ever see myself saying
something that I don't believe to be
true. So, here it goes. You have to have
a belief system that is both true and
optimistic.
Personal responsibility is true and
wildly optimistic. And it is people's
belief system and the value system that
they cobble together over a lifetime
that will lead them to reject that. And
all I can say is reject it at your own
peril for the following reason. Personal
responsibility is about remembering you
can do something and change. And I I can
sum up personal responsibility in a
single quote by Kobe Bryant. Booze don't
block dunks. That's personal
responsibility. You can get so good at
something that no matter how much people
hate you, the best athletes in the world
were paid millions of dollars and
trained to stop Kobe Bryant from
scoring. And yet he scored 81 points in
a single game. So you can get so good no
matter how much people hate you, no
matter how much they're training and
trying to defeat you, they can't. And
that is the most exciting thing in the
world to me that wait, you're saying
that I can get so good at something that
at least the vast majority of humanity
can't stop me. There will always, of
course, I'm unfortunately I don't I
don't yet believe that I am Kobe Bryant
in anything that I care about. So, but
that I can get better than the vast
majority of humanity at something by
dedicating my time and energy to that
thing. That is so cool. That is so
liberating. It's changed my life. It's
given me hope. It got me up off the
floor. It It in every possible way, it
has changed my life. It is the thing
that I rely on when I'm feeling my most
anxious. I'm like, I can get better at
this. A word. And then I remember that's
right. Like if I put time and energy
into this, I can get better. So it's
okay if I'm actually not good at this.
If people are coming after me and
saying, "You're stupid. You're seeing
this wrong." I'm like, maybe I really
am. Like maybe there's really something
to learn here. Even with personal
responsibility, if somebody shows me
that taking personal responsibility for
my life is worse than if I didn't, I
would change. But in every metric I have
ever encountered and including all the
people that I've introduced this idea to
that have then gone on to do something
with it, it has made every single one of
their lives better to a person without
exception. And so I'm just like, I want
people to win so badly. I'm wired to
love other people winning almost as much
as I love winning myself. When I was
six, I threw an Easter egg contest so
that my sister would find more eggs than
I did because I knew it meant more to
her. And I just was so happy to see her
win. So like it just that is innate. I
didn't do anything to earn that. I'm not
an extra nice person. Just for whatever
reason, I really enjoy seeing other
people win. And so dude, when I'm giving
these ideas, I'm like, it will help you.
It will help you. You like I'm already
doing it. My life is already a
reflection of this and
it's true and optimistic. Just to bring
it all back around, it is true and
optimistic. And so I hope people embrace
it. I know that some people don't
because they have a value system where
they're getting value out of being in a
helpless position. And that's
heartbreaking because it's it doesn't
feel good. At least it didn't when I was
there.
I'm trying to think of the rebuttals
because I agree that having a bias to
optimism and personal responsibility has
solved all of
Can I give you the rebuttal
please?
So the rebuttal is that societal energy
and momentum really really matter and
that we are the shout and the echo. So
even though if you feel like you are a
victim and that life is out of your
control and it's stacked against you and
there's nothing you can do
when you are the recipient of legitimate
injustice. The world is going to rally
to your side and be like, "Yo, you've
been wronged. We celebrate you. We love
you. We elevate you. Like this is just
so crazy. It should never happen to
you." That will feel awesome. And so
you've been embraced and there is a lot
of cultural momentum around that. Now
the problem is that when you're by
yourself thinking about yourself, you
feel disempowered and it does not feel
good and you're in a very dark [__]
place which is a big reason why I think
right now that people are I mean suicide
is like depending on the age group is
like the number one leading cause of
death for like teenage boys. I mean
that's nuts. So clearly something going
on. So, I don't think people will feel
good about themselves when they're by
themselves if they adopt that value
system. But they are getting huge
emotional rewards from the crowd. Now,
the crowd can't save them again when
they're by themselves, but
to deny that to be embraced for
something like that feels good would be
foolish because it really does feel
good. And I spent time there feeling
sorry for myself for a long time. And
when somebody's like, "Wow, that really
does suck." I was like, "Yeah, man. That
that feels good to be acknowledged." And
so I get it and I want to acknowledge
it, too. Like, it really is when people
have the deck stacked against them. That
really sucks. That really sucks. And
there are I mean, look, I've spent
enough time in the inner cities. There
are people with the deck stacked way
hard against them. But my thing is you
can actually get out and you How about
this? You can make your life a hundred
times better. No matter how bad it is,
you can make it a hundred times better.
And that joy, seeing people do that is
everything. It's everything for them.
It's everything for me as somebody who
just likes to see people win. And I
don't see that same 100x improvement on
people that embrace a different value
system, but it's real and there's a lot
of momentum.
Is that unwillingness to accept that
idea also somewhat linked to people's
own self-esteem? Because when we admit
personal responsibility, for some
people, especially those that have a
lower sort of sense of self-worth, maybe
they see that as evidence of their
further evidence of their own
inadequacy.
I'm going to bend it more to identity.
So, you build your identity and I I have
the deck stacked against me for whatever
reason. And
when that becomes your identity and you
value yourself for that, like I have the
deck stacked against me and I stand
strong in the face of this and you know
I can deal with these slings and arrows
or or I fight back against them and so I
become like I'm really on a mission to
fight against this and all of that
becomes your identity. So now you you
have to give up personal responsibility
to embrace that and to fight for it.
But
you get that, right? You get the tribe.
You get the other people in that
community that feel the same.
But what you've given up is really being
able to change and to acquire skills and
to become capable of more. And so my
obsession is getting people to
understand skills have utility. Now
skills have utility and they let you do
something better than other people. You
can do things that other people can't
do. that's a monetizable b there is
something hardwired in all of us to work
hard to g to gain skills that allow us
to serve the group right as a social
animal you have an imperative buried in
your brain there is no way to escape it
to contribute to the group so if you
embrace personal responsibility you're
going to get all these other kinds of
rewards because you'll be able to
accumulate skill set you will be able to
dunk and people will not be able to stop
you right like that becomes the reality
that you live in it's super intoxicating
because going back to this idea of why
it matters to Make sure that you have a
narrative that is true. Because when
it's true, your predictive machine of a
brain can actually predict how to change
the world to what you want it to be,
which I will define power as the ability
to close your eyes, imagine a world
better than this, open your eyes, gain
the skills you need to make that world
come true. That's power. And to get that
power, you have to acquire skills. To
acquire skills, you have to take
responsibility. To take responsibility,
you have to reject being in the victim
category, even though it's real. Like
that's the other thing I want people to
understand. The most insidious thing
about excuses is that they're so valid.
You have a valid reason to feel like a
victim. You may really be being
victimized, but the question is, is that
going to serve you moving forward? I'm
obsessed. Have you read uh The Long Walk
to Freedom by Nelson Mandela?
No.
Oh my god. You have to read this book.
Like when I say there are few humans I
look at and go I don't think I could
ever be that amazing.
Holy hell. He was in prison for 28
years. And he comes out and he's like,
no, no, no. We're not seeking revenge.
That to to oppress is to give up your
humanity. That was his whole thing. And
so he's like, I feel bad for people who
oppress me because they had to give up
their humanity to do it. So I am
certainly not going to come out and be
the oppressor. That would make no sense.
So it's what I call the third way. This
is me totally. He just didn't use those
words. This is me ripping his ideas off.
But his whole thing was there there are
three paths before you. Remain the
oppressed. Not going to do that. Become
the oppressor. Not going to do that. The
third way is to find that way of unity.
And that's what he was all about. It's
the most insane story. Like nobody ever
earned their bonafides more than Nelson
Mandela by my estimation. And when he
comes out and says, "We need to find the
third way. Only the path of unity makes
any sense." And like just brought people
together and refused to to be in that
victim category, was like, "Nope." Like
what happened happened and now we build
from here. Oh man, that just like it
gives me the chills every time I think
about it. So anyway, that's intoxicating
to me. I am so into that. But I
recognize the cultural momentum on the
other side. And so I know how people end
up getting just enough out of that that
they stay there. Quick one. One of the
greatest tips I can give any small
business owner listening right now is to
take risks. In fact, the biggest risk to
your business will be taking too fewer
risks. Complacency and comfort seeeking
will harm your success. But taking risks
can be incredibly daunting. That's why
I've partnered with Vodafone Business
and their VHub, which offers free
one-to-one sessions with VHub digital
advisers, and you can call up and speak
to one completely free of charge,
sharing your ideas and getting input
from someone who's knowledgeable on the
topic and able to help you towards your
next business step. To find out more,
search VHub by Vodafone. And thank you
for Vodafone for sponsoring this
podcast. As you might know, Crafted are
one of the sponsors of this podcast. and
Crafted are a jewelry brand and they
make really meaningful pieces of
jewelry. And this piece by Crafted when
I put it on for me it represents
courage. It represents ambition. It
represents being calm and loving and
respectful and nurturing while also
being the antithesis of that, seemingly
the antithesis of that, which is um
sometimes a little bit aggressive with
my goals and determined and courageous
and brave. The really wonderful thing
about crafted jewelry is it's super
affordable. It looks amazing. The pieces
hold tremendous meaning and they are
really wellmade.
There's two points I want to make. I'm
going to make them at the same time. The
second one's a question. The first the
other rebuttal that I think I've heard
before on the topic of personal
responsibility is well Steve Tom you've
got a a privilege of your mindset that
you
I'm white so it's really bad for me and
I'm a guy.
But even your people would will look at
the Tom they see before them today. The
guy that understands these ideas that
has that ability to think through things
slowly as you said but speak about them
very quickly. There seems to be, if I'm
looking at 45-year-old Tom today, a huge
amount of mindset privilege. That's how
it seems. I'm not saying that is I know
some your your prior story very very
clearly. So people say there's this
mindset privilege where it's not easy
just to get up off the floor and just
learn a skill. So when I hear this
article, when I see this article about
it being my fault, I wish it I wish it
was so easy. Tom, I've got chronic deep
depression. The doctors have told me
there's a cycle imbalance in my brain of
a chemical. I I'm at the point of
wanting to end my life. So this article,
it just makes me feel inadequate. It
makes me feel like it's my fault. That's
what I I saw, I read, I felt.
That's that's the thing where I go, what
do we say to those that group?
You ready?
Yeah.
It's all true. And if you have a
neurochemical imbalance, that really
sucks. Like I can just tell you looking
at my mom, I'm prone to anxiety. So
there is um I'm sure if when this all
gets mapped out, it will become clear
that I have markers for anxiety, whether
they were epigenetic or genetic, but
that I came out just primed to become
anxious.
So that sucks for me because I've really
had to contend with anxiety. Like this
is one of the biggest issues in my life.
I think about anxiety almost every day.
So, it is really a thing that I've had
to manage, especially for somebody
striving in the way that I have. So, I'm
constantly putting myself in the
position of being anxious. I remember in
high school, I promised myself I would
never again do anything that made me
nervous. That was the word I used back
then, that I would never again do it.
And yet, my adult life has been a
betrayal of that promise that I made to
myself in high school because all I do
is put myself in situations that make me
anxious. So, but the striving and
getting better has been a reward of
untold proportions. So, when I think
about
we all in some way, we all have it worse
than somebody else, right? So, somebody
with Tourette's that sucks. I would not
want to have Tourette's. Somebody that
gets multiple sclerosis,
that sucks. I would not want that.
Alzheimer's, cancer, heart disease,
whatever the thing is that makes your
life worse, it really does make it
worse. But the only thing that compounds
that problem is to lean into that that
it sucks to be me. Whereas take Stephen
Hawking, right?
What are you going to say? What what
advantage did he have? Right? Like he
literally couldn't move. So in his early
20s, he starts losing every function
that he has other than his brain. And he
realizes at one point, this sucks, but
if I in fact, he has a quote. Oh god,
people are really going to hate this.
Stephen Hawking, okay, quadriplegic
in a wheelchair, basically can blow in a
straw and move his eyes. I think towards
the end, like he could only move one
eye. I mean, it was crazy. So, this guy,
there's just not a lot he can do. He's
been spoonfed since he was like 30 years
old. Like, crazy. Crazy. Imagine not
being able to like go to the bathroom by
yourself forever. Like, every time. I
mean, crazy. So this guy says, "What I
have found is that no one will help you
if you don't help yourself." And it just
is, man. We look at somebody who who
despite all of that is like trying to
make contributions to physics or that,
you know, ended up being htick and he
just realized that I can actually get
help from people, but not if I'm not
helping myself first. There's just
something that we respond to.
Are you optimistic? You talked about
this cultural movement. I'm freakishly
optimistic, but because I need a belief
system that is both true and optimistic,
I don't want to fall for traps. And if I
paint myself a falsely optimistic view
of what's real, I'll get tripped up. And
so
optimistic about that personal
responsibility movement,
everything.
Are you optimistic that
oh that that will gain momentum?
That that it will um lose momentum. It
has lost so much momentum just in my
lifetime that the pendulum is swinging
so hard in that direction. So, I don't
know if it swings back in the next 5
years, the next 50 years. It will swing
back. But if now we're going to really
derail. But I remember as a 16-year-old
boy reading about Roman orgies and I was
so angry because I was like, "How is it
possible that they were having orgies
2,000 years ago and me now in like the
mid '9s, like my mom would have a
seizure. I wasn't allowed to go see the
movie Basic Instinct." So it's like I
was like, "How did we go in my sixth
brain? How did we go backwards?" I was
like I I feel betrayed by all the
generations between Roman orgies and now
I was like how did we end up here? It's
cyclical. Everything is cyclical. And so
once you understand the cycles one, it
can be a little daunting. So if you read
Ray Dallio's book, Principles for
Dealing with a Changing World order,
no.
Oh, it's going to [__] up your sleep. So
you're welcome.
Thank you. But he uh he outlines he goes
back he goes back I think to like 500
BCE but he really focuses on the last
500 years and he shows you this is all a
loop and that there are only so many
personality types and you can just watch
culture loop and loop and loop and loop
and cultures build up and then they
crash down. The next one builds up and
then it crashes down. He's like it's
freakishly predictable. It goes in six
steps, the cycle does. And there is not
yet a society in the last 2500 years
that has avoided this cycle that lasts
about 100 to 150 years. So the reality
is that I'm like I don't think we get
out of this cultural momentum quickly. M
I think that the phrase tough men make
good times, good times make weak men,
weak men make hard times, hard times
make strong men, and you loop and loop
and loop and loop.
And we have been in good times for a
long time. And so I think we've I'm just
going to keep doing myself damage here.
I think we've gotten soft.
And I think because of that, we are
headed for hard times. And I think the
hard times will take care of any of the
um values and belief systems that aren't
useful in the acquisition of skills.
What do those hard times look like in
your
Oh Jesus.
So this is fun. This I'm sure will be
the last time that uh I go on a podcast.
Uh so just had Ray Deli out on my
podcast and in his book he pegged civil
war in the US at a 30% chance. That book
came out I think two months ago. he now
pegs our chances at 40%. So, we're
moving in the wrong direction. Remember,
this is the guy that spent inordinate
amounts of money researching um the
movements of these societies. And he's
just like, we as the American Empire, we
are uh in mid to late stage five and
stage six is civil war and revolution.
So, I think we're probably Look, here's
part of why I love web 3. I think web 3
is the only thing I can see on the
horizon that gives us a shot of bringing
back a thriving middle class, which is
precisely what you need to do to avoid a
bloody civil war or revolution. So,
that's part of the reason that I'm so
gung-ho about it. I try not to be
delusional, but it it gives me reason
for optimism.
But, I think we are headed in the wrong
direction. I think that we are getting
more and more divisive and I think every
single person has to say to themselves I
have to race to the middle and right now
people are racing to the extremes and
they want to dehumanize the other side
and look there are things like on the uh
personal responsibility side I'm not
angry with people that are angry with me
I'm like I need to find a way to like
meet you in the middle so that like we
can both learn from each other and we
can have love for each And ultimately
it's the friction between the two sides
and that not everybody should come over
to my side because maybe it's too um
it's too harsh and it doesn't show
enough empathy for people word like hey
I'm down to like come to that middle but
I need you to come to the middle right
and so what ends up happening like you
can look at these charts that show
whatever candidate presidential
candidate in the US is or whatever party
excuse me whatever party is closest to
the middle becomes the party that wins
the election. But as you look at the
graphs, they're just moving farther and
farther to the extremes. And so while
the one that is closest to the middle
will win, they're still both in the
extremes. So I'm just like, yo, I refuse
to take a political identity. That [__]
scares me. I think people are just
putting themselves in a gnarly position.
I'm over here channeling um long walk to
freedom like as quickly as I can trying
to think just like unity, unity, unity,
getting people together like yay. Like
as polyiana as I can make it sound like
we just have to recognize that there are
two predominant
personality types. Those that are more
on the personal responsibility side and
those that are more on the empathy side
and that we need both and we have to
value each other. And I remember, so
I've been in business relationships in
the past, not to dox anybody, but where
I had partners that they just would butt
heads and make fun of each other all the
time and just like the other person's a
dumbass. And I was like, what are you
talking about? Like you're both
extraordinary. And so I kept trying to
get them to see it is the friction
between you that makes this magical. And
so stop trying to convince the other
person. Try to meet in the middle with
respect. try to understand where the
other person's coming from, value their
opinion. So my wife and I are we're
alike in a lot of ways, but in sort of a
fundamental disposition, we're very
different. And so we talk about that all
the time. I value that you see this
differently than me. And hopefully you
value that I see this differently than
you. And let's use that friction to
navigate a more intelligent path
forward.
So yeah, uh to go back to your initial
question, I worry that we are headed
towards either a civil war or a war with
China or both. And that if China's
smart, they're watching us going, "Yep,
they're maximally divided." That man,
we're going in a real dark place. I've
never talked about this stuff out loud
uh on camera. And uh I think that the
war in Russia is going to create a food
shortage. watch the All-In podcast
because these are just crib notes.
I've been watching
and so as they were talking about in the
recent episode basically that the food
shortage will be backs stopped by China.
China will exchange that for military
bases etc. We're going to continue to
fight in America over dumb [__] that
hardcore people should not be fighting
over that we should be resilient and
coming together and you know loving uh
our differences and all of that stuff
and we won't be. So we'll be pulling in
opposite directions. China will be
getting stronger in the world stage and
in our moment of maximal weakness, they
make a move for Taiwan and we have a
choice to make where we either back down
and then we effectively forfeit our um
leadership status in the world which
will almost certainly mark the end of
the dollar as the the global reserve
currency which will be devastating. Um
or we fight and now we're in a hot war
with China. either of those options
suck. So, how do we find a diplomatic
solution? That is my obsession. And that
brings me back to web three with just
polyiana uh ideas abounding. But I I am
optimistic through all of that. You
asked me what the bad thing look like.
My hope is that we avoid it. But that is
the thing that I worry about. That's my
disaster scenario.
you're someone that's thought that
through and I'm not surprised that
you've thought that through in
tremendous detail and it's something
that's been you know another thing
that's been front of mind for you. So
knowing
with my presumption that I know the kind
of guy you are, I imagine you've also
thought about the role you can play in
stopping that scenario playing out.
Especially because you're a guy with
great resource, with great intellect,
with great intelligence, with a great
with a great skill set, with a great
platform to tell stories, one that
you're building. the last conversation
we had some four years ago, you talked
to me about this idea of bu building
almost a a more modern version of Disney
with your with your content studios and
storytelling. So, what is the role that
Tom thinks he can play in
Yeah, man. Uh my hope is I can
contribute. I certainly don't think that
um I don't have the intelligence or the
temperament to be a world leader. So, I
will just tell you right now that that
is entirely off the table for me. I have
zero interest. Um, I don't think I'd be
good at it either. So, let me be very
clear. This is not me thinking, well,
I'd be amazing, but I just don't want to
do it. I would be terrible. Uh, so yeah,
I'm definitely not going to contribute
in that way. So, my way to give you one
glimmer, I wrote a comic book with Steve
Aoki called Neon Future, which is
entirely about Nelson Mandela's Third
Way. And it plays out in a fictional way
between people that have augmented their
body with technology and people that
haven't. But it was me in a comic book
exploring those ideas that trying to
point out. So you have this guy Kevi uh
who is representing the third way. He
has every reason to be angry, to strike
back, to um kill, and yet his only
thought is of sacrifice and bringing
people together. And but he's also tough
and he's a badass and he's not a
pushover. And um that whole idea of the
meek shall inherit the earth and meek
being defined as the most dangerous
person on earth who keeps their sword
sheathed. Um you hear Bruce Lee talk
about this a lot. Sunzu, you know, the
whole thing is be so dominant that
nobody wants to fight you. So, and in
that you can actually choose peace
instead of peace sort of being just
because you're too weak to fight. Um, so
my hope is through story I can tell
ideas that make people value differences
that make them want to meet in the
middle, that make them want to love and
be loved. Um, and to of course adopt
personal responsibility with a plum. uh
and recognize that they can get better
and that nobody can stop them and that
the world desperately wants for them to
come alive and to acquire skills that
matter to them and build things that
matter to them and unify and create
incredible things
as a percentage. What do you think the
chances are that that future of the US,
the global sort of Western power getting
into a conflict or getting into a
scenario that is potentially apocalyptic
with a Russia or a China? The exact
scenario you described,
do you think that's more likely to
happen than not?
I think it's less likely to happen as of
today. I am too ignorant on the subject
to give you anything other than to
parrot
people who are far more educated on the
topic than I. So, I want to be very
clear. I know my lane. Yeah.
And so I have formulated a hypothesis
based on other people's research. I have
not done the research myself. I would
never want to be on national television
asked about foreign policy. Like I would
just be the the worst person in the
world. But Ray Dio's assessment of the
situation is so astonishingly well
researched and he's been in the thick of
it for decades. He spent hundreds of
millions of dollars just on research of
global trends and movements. And so when
he says that he pegs US civil war at
about 40% and uh uh US China conflict at
about 40%, I just trust it. So, but that
that is literally me blindly paring.
Quick one. We bring in eight people a
month to watch these conversations live
here in the studio when we're here in
the UK and when we're in LA. If you want
to be one of those people, all you've
got to do is hit subscribe. A light a
more light-hearted topic. You said
earlier about Lisa and um one of the
things you said is that you
fundamentally have differences at a
fundamental level, right? Um me and my
partner have fundamental differences and
as I said earlier with your um the
content you put you put out together
about relationships and love have been
really profound and important to my
relationship with my girlfriend. And
that's why we frequently send each other
the clips. I've had my some of my best
friends in fact send me the clips to
because you make sense of things
together from both perspectives, the
male perspective and the female
perspective in a way that's quite
liberating as someone that's going
through those things.
Um, central to having differences, which
me and my girlfriend discovered we had
is communication. Something that I think
you listed as like number one or two on
your list of nine things to sustain a
17-year marriage in the
the whiteboard list that you and Lisa
held up that time. And you you said
obsessively communicate. That's what you
said.
Um
what how does one of the things that I I
definitely struggled with and I want
your advice on is h what are the
principles of that healthy communication
that ego-free communication that you and
Lisa have adopted?
Never lie.
Okay. Which would make your life in the
moment temporarily easier. I can't tell
you the number of arguments that we'll
be in and she'll give me an out where
she's restating my thesis a little bit
wrong but it would end the argument and
all I have to do is say thank you so
much that means so much to me that you
understand that and I'm like that's not
quite it and I know that when I restate
what it really is it's another hour or
two of arguing but you got to do it
because then you can actually get to
this is where I am at help me understand
where you're at and then let's find the
way forward. But if you never here here
is the the big problem. Most people do
not take the time to articulate to
themselves what's bothering them. So my
whole thing and and this drives my wife
up a wall when we're in an argument. She
likes it the rest of the time, but say
in a single sentence what's bothering
you. Most people can't do it. And I'll
stop her. You're waffling. Stop. say it
in a single sentence because you don't
understand it well enough and therefore
we can't get to it. And so she holds me
accountable to the same thing. If I'm
all over the place, then she's like,
"Hey, single sentence. Give it to me so
I can actually understand where you're
at." Most people they can't. They can't
get to a single sentence or they don't
want to get to a single sentence. They
want to like, but it's all of these
crazy things. It's like it's impossible
to deal with. So give me a single
sentence summation of what your problem
is. No commas, no parentheticals, no
run-ons, a single sentence. I'm feeling
insecure because you uh didn't pay
attention to me when I asked you if you
wanted to go on a date this weekend.
Word. Now, I know right where you're at.
But if you don't want to acknowledge
that that made you feel insecure, now
we're arguing about the tea, as my wife
and I call it. The biggest argument my
wife and I ever got in ever, was over a
cup of tea. We were screaming. We were
on our way to a wonderful vacation. I
actually turned the car around and was
like, "We're not even going. We're going
home right now." And literally when I
turned around, I was like, "This is over
a cup of tea." I'm like, "There is no
way that we are arguing about a cup of
tea." To the point where I am turning
around and we're not going on the
vacation that we've taken in whatever at
that point it had been like 18 months.
So I'm like, "What's this really about?"
And so then we got to the real issue and
I realized, oh my god, in communication
you have to admit your flaws, your
insecurities. Like you need to
immediately go, okay, I'm angry and I
know that when I'm angry, it's because
I'm insecure. What am I insecure about?
Oh, I'm insecure about this. Oh my god.
And then you just own it. Here's what's
really going on for me. And now you can
process through and get to where you
really want to be. But most people
assume they're angry because the other
person is wrong. And once you assume
you're angry because the other person is
wrong, you're never going to get to the
real issue. And so Lisa and I are very
good about okay, what's really bothering
you? And then you and of course when
you're in it, it just really does feel
like they're just wrong. And so I'm I'm
mad because they're wrong. But uh I have
a just belief system that you end up
getting triggered because you're
insecure. And so we have to figure out
what was the insecurity that got
triggered so we can address that and
figure out the path forward.
So interesting. I I was thinking of so
many times where I waffled for the first
hour of a conversation argument with my
girlfriend and then an hour and 30 in
I'm able to crystallize it as something
that I I remember was in Peru with her
maybe a month ago and we're arguing
about I don't even know what but an hour
and a half in I crystallized it to a
single thing which reflected an
insecurity I had from my childhood and
then one it's so funny because when I
said that to her I go you know what it
is when I grew up my mom and dad and I
explained it to her the argument
completely done.
Yep. It was like she finally understood.
And yeah, there's something about
dropping your guard in such a way and
kind of holding up the mirror to
yourself that pacifies and shows you've
arrived at a place of honesty and not
seeking victory.
Word. That's so you gave me the chills.
That's spot on.
One of the things that Lewis House here,
a new good friend of yours and mine, he
said when he was um talking to me about
relationships is that he met his new
part partner Martha and he said to us
straight up, you won't be my first
priority and he listed the things that
would be his priority. So he said my
mission, my vision, whatever else it
was. And then the third thing was like
our relationship. Now, when I looked at
that whiteboard that you did with Lisa,
number seven, I believe, no, number
nine, I believe, was this marriage is
our first priority. It says, yeah, on
the nine lessons we learned over 17
years of marriage. The number one, the
the number nine thing on that list was
make your marriage your highest
priority. And that sits in conflict with
what Lewis said to me. So, I'm like,
he's telling the truth. Is it both? Is
it? Well, so it it will be a question of
results. So, Lewis, you know, I love
you, brother. Uh, so I will just say
this, that he was honest with her is
amazing. And that's going to buy them
several years of like, he told me, I
understand, but I believe relationships
require too many sacrifices for them not
to be the thing that you reinforce as
your highest priority. And if it isn't
giving you more than anything else gives
you, then it will always lose out. And
so ultimately, they will either be
living parallel lives. Anybody that
chooses this, you'll end up living
parallel lives where you each have
something that's more important like
kids, which is one of the reasons that
Lisa and I didn't have kids because we
were both honest like the kid would be
our first priority, which means that
each of us would fall into second place.
And did we want to do that? And so that
was part of why we didn't have kids. And
I think that's right. I think that if
you're going to raise kids, yo, they
need to be your first priority. Um, but
I don't have kids, so whatever. There
are probably people that have way better
advice than me on children. But anyway,
that was part of why we didn't have
kids.
And
a relationship is massive compromise.
Massive.
That's so interesting because he said
the opposite.
Oh, no. No.
He said, "Don't compromise anything."
It won't. It won't. Anybody who takes
that I want to make this about Louis so
dearly.
No, I know. just different perspectives,
right?
Yeah. I I will say that uh
I've got a 20-year marriage uh to back
up my my thesis here. Um and if
a relationship is compromised because
you have two people that view the world
in even slightly different ways that
want slightly different things. And so I
mean Lewis has made it clear that there
are two things that are more important.
So there's going to be constant
collision and friction there. Um I think
we have an innate desire as a human
being to be somebody's number one
priority. And I have found in my own
life that there is nothing more
extraordinary, nothing more uplifting,
no high higher than being somebody's
number one that is your number one and
you love and respect each other and you
have a thriving sexual relationship and
it it is it is the most profoundly
joyful thing I've ever experienced in my
life. It's stabilizing. So, the people
that have the strongest home life take
the biggest risks. I remember when I
heard that, I was like, "Whoa, that
really makes sense to me." Because I
will say what I say to myself all the
time is, "Hey, I'm building this thing.
I'm really putting myself out on a limb
trying to build this company. If it all
goes to nothing and the whole world
thinks I'm a [__] at least I have my
wife." And I'm just like, "Oh, yeah.
Word." Like, I will have my wife. Like
no matter what other people think, if I
continue to honor her in the way that I
honor her now, I will have my wife. And
so the only thing I fear, I don't fear
going broke. I don't fear losing my
business. I fear losing my wife because
the outsized return that I've gotten out
of this marriage compared to what money
has brought me or um whatever micro fame
that I have, like it it's awesome. Money
is awesome. The micro fame is awesome,
but it's nothing compared to my wife.
Nothing. Nothing. So, I mean, it's just,
oh my god, it's incredible, man. It's
incredible. And so, that to get that
requires sacrifice. It requires
attention. It requires making it your
first priority because otherwise there's
going to be a moment where one person
needs that. And they realize that
they're giving that up, right? And the
thing is though, from anybody's
perspective, if you'd asked me at the
like when we were first dating, I would
have said the same thing. There's no way
we just got together. You know what I
mean? So, you're not going to be my
number one priority. So for me there was
a line in the sand when I decided to
propose. That was a very difficult thing
for me. I really thought about it man. I
debated it. Is she really the one? And
finally I was like well I'm either never
getting married or I'm marrying this
woman cuz I have never felt like this.
Like she feels worth the sacrifices all
that. And once I proposed there I never
once thought about it again. There was
no cold feet. There was never like oh
should I shouldn't I? Once I made that
decision it was everything. So my advice
to anybody in that situation is there
should be a line where you say, "And now
because of what I want this relationship
to become, I'm going to make it my
number one." Now look, I've built
extraordinary businesses even with my
wife being my number one priority. And
she isn't the thing that I allocate the
most time to. And that's important to
understand. But she's my number one
priority. So if ever she came to me and
said, "Hey, I really need you right now,
but there was something really important
going on in the business." I'd be like,
"Word." totally unconlicted. Awesome.
What do you need? I'm here. Which has
happened many times. So on that, it's
actually nice to Jaco Willing's point of
discipline equals freedom. Um, knowing
that she's my number one, that I don't
need to be conflicted. If ever those two
any two things collide, it's always
Lisa. There's like a piece in that.
Is there anything you wouldn't
compromise? So, I once told Lisa, I
said, "Look, I'll give up virtually
anything for you, but don't ever ask me
to give up my ambition because I don't
know who I am without it. And I don't
know that I want to. And look, I'm very
thoughtful about in my back pocket, I
keep Buddhist style detachment
so that if ever I got overwhelmed, it
wasn't fun anymore, whatever, I would
just pull out the detachment. And I know
how to do that. And I know how to not um
strive. I know how to loosen my bonds to
desire and wanting, which is, by the
way, something very wise for everybody
to get those tools in place, especially
if you're a stver. But I love it. I love
the pursuit. I don't need the wins. The
pursuit makes me feel alive. And
business is the only game I found that
you can play until you die. And so,
there's something really awesome about
striving to be the best. Even though I
don't know, I've in all of my years in
in 46 years, you were very kind to
lowball my age earlier. Uh, in 46 years,
I have never found myself to be the best
at anything. And yet, the pursuit of
being the best has been one of the most
thrilling rides of my life.
It comes with the cost, right, which is
for you have been the most severe cost
that you I've heard you name is living
with that anxiety, that feeling of
anxiety. Was there a place that you went
to? Because for me when I went to when I
go to barley my girlfriend lives there
at the moment. When I go there and I'm
out of the business striving ambition da
da da social media all the time mindset
there is a different level of peace
within me. So sometimes my brain goes
well Steve if you know that there's
another place you could live without
feelings of anxiety or whatever why
don't you just go live there and strive
in a smaller way outside of social media
and huge public scrutiny.
Yeah.
I'm presuming there's a place where you
felt [__] there's no anxiety when I'm in
this zone.
Yeah. And I think the right answer is I
ask myself a slightly different
variation of that same question. And it
goes like this. Do I still want to
strive enough to make it worth not going
and doing that peaceful stress-free
life? Which for me would be writing?
Just write full-time. I have enough
money. I never need to work again ever.
Not a single day in my life. So every
day that I choose to go to battle, I'm
choosing to go to battle. And so the
second that the answer is no. I actually
it isn't worth it anymore. Then I would
go do that and I would just write. And
knowing that I have that in my back
pocket is
extremely
liberating. So I know at any time I can
stop. I can detach. I can not continue
to pursue this. And that has allowed me,
it's like this magic trick that allows
me to carry a lot more weight, to deal
with a lot more stress because I know
every day is a choice. And so that
allows me to have fun. It allows me to
remain playful. It It is like when I
think about how much stress I've taken
on in my life with business. I wouldn't
have been able to do it if I couldn't
imagine a life that would be just as
awesome. And so there's a parallel life
where I'm a writer and I chill and spend
time with my wife and you know whatever,
learn languages and just [__] travel
around, whatever. Like that'd be
awesome. I would love that. So, um, I
just love this one a little bit more.
But if I if this diminished in its joy,
I've got this other thing that would be
so dope. So, yeah, I don't have any sort
of like, oh my god, what would I do? And
I remember, so I've proven this stuff to
myself. And look, never teach something
that you isn't like you're not living
it. That every word out of my mouth, I
live. And I realized that I could very
easily just
detach myself from the success, the
achievement, the whatever. Because when
we left Quest, it was like, oh, just
done. And it wasn't hard for me in the
slightest. Like Lisa really was part of
her identity. So for her having been a
founding member of Quest, like it was
hard. Like in fact, I still think she
sees it as like her child, whereas like
people will almost remind me, oh yeah,
that's right. [__] I did build Quest. I
don't think about it. It's not a part of
my identity. It's just not my brain
isn't wired that way. I don't um I don't
cling on to things like that. So for me,
it's like I want to feel good about
myself when I'm by myself. I want to
have fulfillment and I want to do things
that I love in and of themselves. And
because and and this is the one thing
that haunts me. In fact, this like I say
this and I think people think I'm
kidding, but I actually worry about this
in myself. So I have one thing in me
that is problematic. It's the very thing
I have to struggle against in business.
Like I'm constantly having to course
correct. When people hear me teach the
opposite of this is because it's the
lesson that I need to constantly remind
myself.
I really believe you can do anything you
set your mind to, but not everything.
And that really bothers me. And I'm not
sure why, but I have something in the
way that I view the world, my belief
system, my value system, uh the natural
rewards that I get for um like even in
this podcast, we've covered a lot of
weird things. And I can talk pretty
deeply about a lot of different topics
because I love that [__] I want to be
able to go deep on a lot of different
things. I don't want to do just one
thing. And so that is the the one thing
that haunts me is I I can I could give
something up and go do something else
very easily. My identity is not tied to
this that or the other. Um but I want to
do everything I want to do.
Why?
The question I get asked the most is
Tom, how do you find your passion? And I
walk people through the process. You
don't find it, you build it. Now, one
thing that I've I worry about is because
all of our minds are different and
because there's a region of the brain
that I just recently learned about for
determination where they can hit you
with transcranial magnetic stimulation,
hit the region of your brain that deals
with uh determination and you'll be
like, I can do it. I know I can do it.
What can you do? I don't know. I just
know I can do it. So, they can actually
trigger this sense of like, I won't
stop. I'm going to do it. but you have
no idea what it is that you're not going
to stop doing. So, there's all these
weird things. So, anyway, there's a
region in your brain for motivation,
which only reinforce this idea in my
head that maybe I'm just really good at
building desire. And so, over my life, I
re one I react to things very strongly.
And then when I like something, I pour
myself into it and I remind myself how
much I like it. And I tell other people
how much I like it. And I do it in this
embodied way where I get really excited.
And so I've reinforced all these things
in my mind that I really like. Like I
really like Japan Man. I really like
anime. I really like manga. I really
want to make like those essay anime
videos that people do and like get into
some really obscure anime. And I want to
watch every anime on Netflix and like
write books about that [__] and write
books about why as a storytelling
format. It's just different, man. Like
I'm obsessed. But I also want to learn
Greek. That would be dope. Learning
Greek like with my wife. I'm super
passionate about that. At one point we
were going to move to Greece and I was
going to learn. I promised myself at one
point I would get published in Greek
like this whole thing. I also want to
write a book. This mindset stuff, man,
it's really like a big thing for me. But
by the way, nothing gets me like
storytelling. So I really want to tell
my stories, but I also like video games.
So it's like, yo. So all of these things
speak to me at a level that's like
screaming passion where I am passionate.
I could live an entire life where I was
an anime scholar. I didn't discover
anime until I was in my 40s. But now I
could live I am not kidding. I could
become an anime scholar and live an
extraordinarily joyful life. So I have
to be really thoughtful. And people that
take my course uh hear me say this a
lot. You're standing in a room with a
thousand doors. your job is to close 999
of them. The problem isn't finding a
door to walk through. It's shutting the
doors and only walking through one.
That's the hard part. And so, my life
has been a never-ending series of
frustrations that I can only really
excel at one thing at a time. But it's
not confusing to me that every 10 years
I've completely reinvented myself.
Wow.
It's remarkable. you you have an ability
to focus and achieve great things while
still being having that kind of
predisposition as you describe it to be
obsessively deeply interested in so many
things at the same time to that extent
but it shows Tom it shows in your deep
understanding as you as you said of of
topics I feel like I could ask you about
anything and I feel like you would
that isn't true but I would tell you the
things that I don't know I'd be like I
don't know [__] about it
but yeah
we have a closing tradition on this
podcast
let's do it
where the previous guest writes a
question for the next guest
Tell a specific story of someone in your
life who helped make you into the person
you are today. What did they do
specifically that made you into the
person you are?
Oh, that's a great one. Okay, so I will
preface the story of how she did it with
my one of my favorite stories about my
wife. So long before my wife became an
entrepreneur, she had um
she had really influenced me in like a
Jerry Maguire way where it was like she
believed in me when nobody else believed
in me even when I was struggling to
believe in myself. Like she just had an
irrational belief in myself in in me.
And I often think back to who would I
have become if I hadn't met her because
I was in a dark place. I didn't have
like it's not like I had all the beliefs
that I had now. I didn't have any of
these beliefs. I thought I was not smart
enough. I did not think I could
accomplish. And so my wife in many ways
manipulated me in these wonderful ways
to get me to see what she saw. And it
was empowering and it made me, yeah,
yeah, like I really can't do this. And
it really is that moment in Jerry
McGuire where he's like, "Yeah, this is
good. Like, keep coming." Like she would
just do that at these critical junctures
in my life. And so long before she
became an entrepreneur, I I don't
remember what happened, but I was
weeping, man. I'm not a crier. I I was
like ugly crying, like having a hard
time catching my breath. And I was like,
you're never going to get enough credit
for how you've shaped me. That I
wouldn't be who I am if it wasn't for
you. And remember, I found my wife when
I was 24. So, I went on one date with
her and never looked back. She's the
only woman I've ever said I love you to
in a romantic way, as my mom likes to
remind me. Uh, and
she really really shaped my brain. She
shaped my beliefs. She shaped my
motivations. like you know a a woman to
whom you are sexually attracted there's
almost no end if she's got like real
emotional wisdom there's almost no end
to which she can motivate and encourage
and um yeah shape you like she's just
she's my best friend she's my lover and
with that she has all of the the levers
at her disposal to help me maximize my
potential and she has openly pulled
those lever lovers and made me believe
and encouraged me and supported me. Oh
my god. And so just like all of these
things. And so one day somebody asked me
like, "Who's had the biggest influence
on your life?" And I was like, "My
wife." Like that's just so self-evident.
It's the one. You could remove anybody
else from my life, even my mom. And I
know she doesn't want to hear that. And
I would fundamentally be similar to who
I am. Wouldn't be the same. My mom
obviously had tremendous influence on
me, but I would not be anything like
what I am if I hadn't been married to
Lisa. Like, it's just crazy. It's crazy
the thousands of little ways, little
moments where she's in my head like, you
know, encouraging me or making me
question a decision, making me think
smarter about something. I was just
crazy. So, she loved the idea of behind
every great man is a great woman. And
she was just so adept at like, "Go ask
for this. Go talk to this person. Push
on that." And I was like, "Ah, I don't
know. Like, that makes me feel
uncomfortable." She's like, "No, no, no,
trust me. You've earned it. You're worth
it. Push for it." And I would push for
it and get it and be like, "Whoa, what
the hell?" So, it was it was just
extraordinary. And so yeah, that was a
very long answer to that question, but
Lisa,
a beautiful answer, very inspiring, and
um so much truth in that for so many
people that are listening. And I and I
do hope, you know, when we part of the
reason we have podcasts and we have
these deep conversations that are full
of context is so that people can
understand intention. They can have
conversations that aren't always
comfortable or that that don't fit in
280 characters and that aren't meant to
fit in 280 characters. and they can um
see the intention and the experience
that sits behind it. And that's why I
love having these conversations. But
that's why I love talking to you. I
could talk to you forever because I it's
like I know how many books you've read,
Tom, and your ability to have condensed
the the sort of key part of the wisdom
in so many things in those books, but
also in your own life through
self-awareness is the most amazing thing
ever. I'm going to say this because I
feel like people need to get the roses
sometimes. There's a lot of people in
the self-awareness game. There's a lot
of sorry the self sort of development
content um personal development space
however you want to define it you are by
far
the
best in my view based on what I think
matters someone that has immense
knowledge is able to deliver it but in a
way that's engaging and wrapped in
storytelling
and then maybe the fifth is just this
humility and this honesty so I've said
this to my friends privately when they
say what what's this guy like what's
this guy going Tom's the best. Tom is
the best. And whether you realize that
or not, whether it matters or not is
there, it doesn't matter. But for me,
you are. And you're the guy when, you
know, if a video pops up or if it's you
and Lisa making a video together, I'm
like, I don't I don't necessarily need
to understand the subject matter, but I
know the guy and his thinking and his in
intention and I know the way his brain
thinks. So, I'm going to get a ton of
value from this. I'm just telling you to
your face because I say it behind your
back.
That's extraordinary.
No, it's true. It's what I say behind
your back.
Um, and I I was perplexed when I first
met you at your house some 4 years ago.
And I thought, [__] hell. It's funny
cuz it makes me realize how much I I can
improve in the most positive way, you
know, in terms of my delivery, in terms
of my ideas and my thinking and my
storytelling. It's really made me like
inspired by by how much I the space I
have to grow. Um, so thank you. Thank
you for giving me your time today. I
know you're incredibly busy person,
man. Thank you for one of the most fun
interviews I've ever done. This was a
lot of fun.
No, it really was. It was awesome.
I had a few words to say about one of my
sponsors on this podcast. As the seasons
have begun to change, so has my diet.
And um right now, I'm just going to be
completely honest with you, I'm starting
to think a lot about slimming down a
little bit because over the last couple
of probably the last four or five
months, my diet has been pretty bad. Um
and it started to show a little bit
really over the last two months. I go to
the gym about 80% of the time. So I
track it with 10 of my friends in a
WhatsApp group in this tracker online
that we all use together. And so one of
the things I'm doing now to reduce my
calorie intake and trying to get back to
being nutritionally complete in all I
eat is I'm having the Hule protein
shake. Thank you Hu for making a product
that I actually like. The salted caramel
is my favorite. I've got the banana one
here which is the one my girlfriend
likes, but for me salted caramel is the
one.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.